# Bautch and Price 2024 EDA-project
## Temporal and environmental effects on return rates of chinook salmon in Alaska's Cook Inlet
by Ian Bautch and Aiden Price 
An exploratory data analysis for BIOL 275 Biostatistics at Minnesota State University Moorhead. Instructor: Chris Merkord
### Abstract 
Anadromous fish, like sturgeons and salmonids are species of fish that swim downriver to the ocean to spawn. Their decline in population over the years has been attributed to a array of things such as predation, overfishing, and decline in water quality. For example, Chinook salmon in Cook Inlet, Alaska have been on the decline for over 20 years due to a wide range of human and environmental factors. In order to maintain chinook salmon populations, we need to understand how their populations have changed over time and the factors that have caused those changes. This project will focus on the return rates of chinook salmon and what components are influencing the decline of the largest species of pacific salmon. Alaska Fish and Game monitors four rivers in Cook Inlet for chinook salmon with the Ninilchik River being counted in two separate areas and the Kenai River being monitored for an early and late run return counts, deep creek, and anchor river being the other two. This dataset includes daily counts from May to the end of August with slight variations in time with multiple sonar systems in some rivers. Each river has different escapement goals, the number of fish allowed to escape the fishery and spawn, and varies on the potency of the run, i.e. the number of fish. By visualizing the potency of the different runs over time, we can generate hypotheses about the causes for the decline in population by human impacts along with changing environmental factors. With this, there is hope for the future of this ancient and beautiful Alaskan fish.  
